hey what's up I'm a former scholar of
Buddhism I was especially known for my
work on poly the written form of
philosophy the most ancient form of
Buddhist philosophy that still exists
today in the Tara vada tradition but I'm
also very well-versed in my Ana Buddhism
I have lived in and worked in Mahayana
countries as well as tera vaada
countries
blah blah blah this video is not coming
from the perspective of a hostile
outsider to Buddhism it's coming from
the perspective of an insider if you
know everyone the guys who become
scholars of Buddhism they normally get
asked in one context or another to what
extent they believe in Buddhism to what
extent they support Buddhism as opposed
to merely studying it and it's an
interesting question people phrase the
question different way and and people
define the answer in different ways - I
remember one time a famous scholar of
Buddhism was asked at a Buddhist
monastery why he never became a Buddhist
why he never actually joined the
religion despite spending decades and
decades as a scholar of Buddhism I got
this anecdote from someone who was there
and was an eyewitness to his answer and
he just sat there awkwardly for a while
and then said into the microphone well
you know reincarnation I just couldn't
really believe oh it's a weak answer
because it is possible to be a Buddhist
and not believe in reincarnation and
it's possible to support and believe in
Buddhist philosophy as a really positive
thing in the world and not believe
Makran nation it's possible to reject
all of the superstitious elements of
Buddhism and still really believe that
Buddhist philosophy is important or even
the Buddhism as a religion is a good
thing now I have a separate video on my
channel which is called why I am NOT a
Buddhist why I'm not a member of the
religion today you can go back and watch
that video I encourage you I guess I'll
give a link below this video but that is
really a separate topic when I'm
addressing in this video now instead is
the question of what's wrong with
Buddhism as a philosophy because my
reasons for not being a member of the
religion today have to do with the
people who comprise the religion a the
reality institutionally culturally and
even on a human scale personally of what
the religion is and what it's doing
today the ways in which I'm disappoint
with it the ways in which I don't think
it has the potential to make a positive
difference in the world anymore whereas
before when I was a member of the
religion I did believe in those things I
thought Buddhism had that kind of
potential and I was so to speak
optimistic about what could happen next
50 years the prism am as a philosophy I
think what nobody is willing to come out
and say or what nobody's want to come
out and deal with is Nirvana itself is
the Nirvana experience and this is
interesting I can only compare it to the
status of hell and heaven in Buddhism
the fact that Buddhists both true
believers and secular scholars they tend
to really want to avoid the fact that
this is a religion that was
traditionally based on belief in in hell
they asked its reincarnation in hell but
hell is still hell hell still involves
demons torturing people it still
involves fire and it's somewhat
different from the Christian and Muslim
idea of hell but hell is still hell
people there's a great reluctance to
face up to what the ancient texts
actually say about that and what
traditional Buddhist belief really is
about that Nirvana is even more taboo
for the most part whether people are
openly religiously Buddhist or if
they're covertly religiously Buddhist
which is mostly the case for scholars of
Buddhism they mostly don't want to admit
to what extent they've lost their
objectivity to what extent they have
become true believers in the religion
the Nirvana experience itself as it is
set down in the text is really I would
say fundamentally wrong and misleading
and bad and precludes the development of
Buddhism as a philosophy it prevented
Buddhism from developing as a philosophy
in the ancient period when the Canon was
written within that period of time and
it prevents any progress until today
what do I mean okay uh the Pali Canon
the most ancient collection of Buddhist
philosophy one of things it's famous for
is that it contains real debate and that
is something to be celebrated in
contrast to the Christian Bible the
Jewish Bible or the Muslim Koran which
are more or less dogmatic which tell you
what you ought to believe and tell you
the consequences for not believing it
the Buddhist Canon the Pali Canon
records debates that really do show
you dissent they showed disagreements
between Buddhism and its rival religions
in that period of India genuinely
philosophical disagreements sometimes of
course disagreements about discipline or
other elements of the religion um
disagreements about magic disagreements
about the gods disagreements about the
heavens but still it's debate including
real philosophical debate and it shows
dissent and disagreement dissatisfaction
within Buddhism
it shows criticism of the Buddha it
shows criticism of the Buddha by other
monks shows criticism of the Buddha by
people who haven't yet converted to
Buddhism so non Buddhist but it also
shows some disaffected and disillusioned
monks monks who became X Buddhists monks
who converted back to another religion
or who left Buddhism you know who really
harshly criticized the Buddha and the
Buddhist teaching so that is a huge
advantage over
Christianity Judaism Islam over over
Hinduism also to be frank and it does
very fundamentally make their religion
more philosophical more open-minded etc
however the nature and purpose of the
those debates is very much stunted by
Nirvana itself the purpose of all of the
debates is merely to get you to believe
enough it's merely to convince you up to
a certain point that you should try this
Buddhist method of meditation that you
should try experiencing the jhanas and
then once you have experienced the
jhanas that are on the road to Nirvana
itself then you're convinced that this
whole religion is completely true that
the Buddha's teaching is the most
important thing in the world and you in
a sense have no more questions
or you have no more questions of this
fundamental type so the jhana experience
is not only irrational it really
frustrates rational debate it stymies it
puts an end to the construction of
rational philosophy it stymies the
progress of rational inquiry and pardon
me of rational inquiry and the
experience of jhana if you're willing to
just read what the original texts say is
hallucinatory so we have a religion that
from day one
was embracing the experience of
hallucination as a real and important
source of data so it's not merely I mean
like in ancient Greece
you can say there's a failure to
distinguish between hallucination and
real experience people see the gods and
talk to the gods
sometimes in circumstances that explain
why they're hallucinating I remember I
think this is in Thucydides there's a
story it sure could be Herodotus but in
ancient in the ancient Greek source
there's a guy who was a messenger
running through the high altitude
mountains as fast as he could to deliver
a message and not surprisingly he
started hallucinating in this
circumstance and he saw one of the
ancient Greek gods and spoke to him and
so on now anybody can also in Tibet at
high altitudes you can get oxygen
deprivation and you can loosen it even
more even easily in the ancient world
disease and illness itself is enough to
get you hallucinating with no use of
drugs and with no other susceptibility
still today if you've just experienced
tropical fever many many forms of
illness partly just due to the
exhaustion that cause you will have
hallucination as a side effect but in
ancient Greece you might say there's
this failure to distinguish between
hallucination and real experience in
Buddhism it's worse because the religion
is very fundamentally based on embracing
hallucinatory experience and that is
there as part of the bedrock of the
religion is that people talk to the gods
people see they have visions of their
own prior incarnations or their own
future incarnations they have visions of
demons of yetis of talking to gods like
Indra of teleportation to other realms
and all of this is taken deadly
seriously they have visions of you know
the departed souls soul is not correct
in but it's but we're using being which
language share the departed souls of
people they knew floating through the
air and going to hell and being tortured
the torments of these spirits and so on
and every indication in the Pala Canon
is that the Buddha himself takes this
very seriously that he regards this as
real and he regards these things as
increasing faith in the community so yes
you have an open philosophical you know
there's a lot of so-called critical
thinking
and debate in the in the Pali Canon but
in terms of the core tenets of the
religion the purpose of that debate is
only to bring you up to the point where
you sit down and have that meditative
experience you experience the jhanas and
whether or not you experience Nirvana
you get up to those levels in the jhanas
you have these hallucinatory experiences
and then this confirms your faith in the
religion and the religion carries on and
now suddenly you're quite willing to pay
taxes that support Buddhism another
thing so this you know gives the the
basis for the whole development of the
the institutionalized religion now of
course there are other ways in which the
religion is stymied on the religion was
never trying to solve the kinds of
problems that modern Western philosophy
is trying to solve it was never trying
to solve social or political problems
though there's tons of really
interesting material reflecting on
discussing social and political problems
in ancient India so look bottom line
people make excuses for Buddhism because
Buddhism is better than Christianity it
is better than Islam if you're depressed
as hell by studying the situation in
Muslim politics or Islamic jurisprudence
or Islamic you know Islamic philosophy
and you suddenly turn to the situation
in ancient India with Buddhism or even
today in modern Thailand and there's a
reason why tourists want to go to
Thailand and they don't want to go to
Saudi Arabia being in a you know tera
vaada Buddhist culture it is much more
comfortable for your vacation
even though Thailand has its own
political problems currently they have a
military dictatorship ruling the country
Thailand is not paradise but it's
paradise for some there are many ways in
which modern Thailand is much more
appealing than modern Saudi Arabia and
there are many ways in which the ancient
philosophy of Buddhism is much more
appealing than the medieval philosophies
of Christianity or Islam or Judaism or
what-have-you so in some ways Buddhism I
think gets an easy ride because we're
making those comparative statements but
at some point the comparisons have to
stop and we have to evaluate Buddhism
for what it really is on its own terms
and for what it can and cannot
contribute to the modern world
what can it contribute questions but not
answers I think that the same way that
we can read Aristotle talking about
social political and metaphysical
questions the same way we can read in
ancient Greece two different
philosophers debating whether the earth
is flat or shaped like a drum these
bizarre you know debates about the
nature of reality nature of the atom the
nature of the Sun the nature of the
earth the cosmology of ancient Greece it
is interesting it is intellectually
stimulating for us in the modern world
but in a sense we are really just
reading this stuff because it has the
right questions in those pages you will
not find the right answers